QUICK_START.md, before:

# Quick Start Guide - Pool Evaluation

## TL;DR - Run This Now

```bash
# 1. Set your OpenAI API key
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-your-key-here"

# 2. Run evaluation for all pools (2024-present)
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir results/

# Done! Results will be in results/ directory
```

## What This Script Does

Evaluates all your factor pools from 2024 to present and:
- ✅ **Eliminates all NaN warnings** (rolling window, overflow, etc.)
- ✅ **Fixes LLM evaluation** (was showing `nan`, now works properly)
- ✅ **Tests 2024-present data** by default
- ✅ **Generates comprehensive reports**

## The Two Issues You Had (Now Fixed)

### Issue 1: NaN Warnings ✅ FIXED
```
RuntimeWarning: All-NaN slice encountered
RuntimeWarning: overflow encountered in cast
```
**Solution**: Added comprehensive warning filters in:
- `backtest/modeltester.py` (lines 14-17)
- `run_pool_eval.py` (lines 37-42)
- `eval_mined_factors.py` (line 34)

### Issue 2: LLM showing `nan` ✅ FIXED
```
LLM:  nan
```
**Why it happened**: API key was hardcoded as `"Your own LLM key"`

**Solution**: Now supports API key from:
1. Environment variable `OPENAI_API_KEY`
2. Environment variable `LLM_API_KEY`
3. Command line `--api_key`

## Setup (One Time)

### Step 1: Set API Key

Choose one method:

**Method A: Temporary (current session)**
```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
```

**Method B: Permanent (recommended)**
```bash
# Add to your shell profile
echo 'export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

**Method C: Using .env file**
```bash
# Copy template
cp .env.example .env

# Edit .env and add your key
nano .env

# Load it
source .env
```

### Step 2: Verify Setup
```bash
# Check API key is set
echo $OPENAI_API_KEY

# Should show: sk-...
```

## Common Use Cases

### Evaluate All Pools (2024-Present)
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir results_2024/
```

### Evaluate Without LLM (Faster)
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py --output_dir results_no_llm/
```

### Evaluate Single Pool
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py --pools alphagen --enable_llm --output_dir alphagen_results/
```

### Custom Date Range
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py \
    --test_start 2024-01-01 \
    --test_end 2024-12-31 \
    --enable_llm \
    --output_dir results_2024_only/
```

### Single Factor Analysis (Detailed)
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py \
    --single_factor \
    --enable_llm \
    --output_dir detailed_analysis/
```

## Understanding Output

After running, you'll get:

```
results_2024/
├── summary_20241112_143022.csv          # Quick overview
├── full_results_20241112_143022.json    # Complete data
└── (optional) detailed factor JSONs     # If --single_factor used
```

**Summary CSV contains**:
| pool_name | IC | RankIC | RRE | PFS1 | PFS2 | Diversity | LLM_Score |
|-----------|----|----|-----|------|------|-----------|-----------|
| alphagen_3m | 0.045 | 0.052 | 0.694 | 0.894 | 0.900 | 0.879 | 78.5 |

## Troubleshooting

### "LLM: nan" Still Showing
```bash
# Check if API key is set
echo $OPENAI_API_KEY

# Make sure you used --enable_llm flag
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir results/
```

### "Pool file not found"
```bash
# Check available pools
ls alphagen/*.json
ls gfn_lstm/*/*.json
ls gfn_gnn/*/*.json
```

### Script runs but crashes
```bash
# Check Python version (needs 3.8+)
python --version

# Check required packages
pip install pandas numpy openai qlib
```

## Performance Tips

1. **Without LLM**: 5-10 min per pool
2. **With LLM**: 15-30 min per pool
3. **Run pools in parallel** (different terminals):
   ```bash
   # Terminal 1
   python run_pool_eval.py --pools alphagen --enable_llm --output_dir alphagen/

   # Terminal 2
   python run_pool_eval.py --pools gfn_lstm --enable_llm --output_dir gfn_lstm/

   # Terminal 3
   python run_pool_eval.py --pools gfn_gnn --enable_llm --output_dir gfn_gnn/
   ```

## What Changed vs Old batch_evaluate_pools.py

| Feature | Old | New |
|---------|-----|-----|
| NaN warnings | ❌ Shows many warnings | ✅ Suppressed |
| LLM evaluation | ❌ Shows `nan` | ✅ Works with API key |
| Date range | 2020-2023 | 2024-2025 (configurable) |
| API key config | ❌ Hardcoded | ✅ Env var + CLI |
| Error handling | Basic | Comprehensive |
| Default output | evaluation_results | evaluation_results_2024 |

## Next Steps

After evaluation completes:

1. **Check summary**:
   ```bash
   cat results_2024/summary_*.csv
   ```

2. **Find best pool**:
   ```bash
   # Sort by IC
   cat results_2024/summary_*.csv | sort -t',' -k5 -rn | head -5
   ```

3. **Detailed analysis of best pool**:
   ```bash
   python run_pool_eval.py \
       --pools alphagen \
       --single_factor \
       --enable_llm \
       --output_dir best_pool_detailed/
   ```

## Need Help?

- Full documentation: `POOL_EVAL_README.md`
- Check code: `run_pool_eval.py`
- API key issues: Verify with `echo $OPENAI_API_KEY`

## Example Complete Workflow

```bash
# Complete evaluation workflow
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."

# 1. Quick check
python run_pool_eval.py --compare_only

# 2. Full evaluation
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir full_eval/

# 3. View results
cat full_eval/summary_*.csv

# 4. Detailed analysis of top pool
python run_pool_eval.py \
    --pools alphagen \
    --single_factor \
    --enable_llm \
    --output_dir alphagen_deep_dive/
```

That's it! 🚀

Commit message:

Fix --enable_llm flag to prevent unwanted API calls
Critical Bug Fix:
The --enable_llm flag was not properly preventing LLM API calls. When users had
OPENAI_API_KEY set in their environment for other tools, the evaluator would still
make LLM API calls even without the --enable_llm flag, causing unexpected costs.

Root Cause:
- AlphaEval.run() and run_single_factor() unconditionally called LLM_scores()
- LLM_scores() fell back to environment variables when api_key=None
- The flag only controlled which API key was passed, not whether LLM ran at all

Changes Made:

1. backtest/modeltester.py
   - Added enable_llm parameter to run() and run_single_factor()
   - Only call LLM_scores() if enable_llm=True
   - Set llm_scores to NaN with clear message when disabled
   - Prevents any API calls when flag is not used

2. run_pool_eval.py
   - Pass enable_llm flag to evaluator.run() and run_single_factor()
   - Ensures flag actually controls LLM behavior

3. eval_mined_factors.py
   - Determine enable_llm from whether api_key is provided
   - Pass enable_llm flag to evaluator methods

4. Documentation Updates
   - QUICK_START.md: Clarify that --enable_llm is required
   - POOL_EVAL_README.md: Add warning about explicit opt-in requirement

Behavior After Fix:
- WITHOUT --enable_llm: No API calls, even if OPENAI_API_KEY is set
- WITH --enable_llm: API calls only if key is available
- Clear messages when LLM is disabled vs. failed

This prevents users from accidentally incurring OpenAI API costs when they
have the key set for other purposes but don't want LLM evaluation.

Credit: Issue identified by user review

QUICK_START.md, after:

# Quick Start Guide - Pool Evaluation

## TL;DR - Run This Now

```bash
# 1. Set your OpenAI API key
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-your-key-here"

# 2. Run evaluation for all pools (2024-present)
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir results/

# Done! Results will be in results/ directory
```

## What This Script Does

Evaluates all your factor pools from 2024 to present and:
- ✅ **Eliminates all NaN warnings** (rolling window, overflow, etc.)
- ✅ **Fixes LLM evaluation** (was showing `nan`, now works properly)
- ✅ **Tests 2024-present data** by default
- ✅ **Generates comprehensive reports**

## The Two Issues You Had (Now Fixed)

### Issue 1: NaN Warnings ✅ FIXED
```
RuntimeWarning: All-NaN slice encountered
RuntimeWarning: overflow encountered in cast
```
**Solution**: Added comprehensive warning filters in:
- `backtest/modeltester.py` (lines 14-17)
- `run_pool_eval.py` (lines 37-42)
- `eval_mined_factors.py` (line 34)

### Issue 2: LLM showing `nan` ✅ FIXED
```
LLM:  nan
```
**Why it happened**: API key was hardcoded as `"Your own LLM key"`

**Solution**: Now requires explicit opt-in via `--enable_llm` flag:
1. Use `--enable_llm` flag to enable LLM evaluation
2. API key from `OPENAI_API_KEY` or `LLM_API_KEY` environment variable
3. Or pass via command line `--api_key`
4. **Without `--enable_llm`, no API calls are made even if key is set**

## Setup (One Time)

### Step 1: Set API Key

Choose one method:

**Method A: Temporary (current session)**
```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
```

**Method B: Permanent (recommended)**
```bash
# Add to your shell profile
echo 'export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

**Method C: Using .env file**
```bash
# Copy template
cp .env.example .env

# Edit .env and add your key
nano .env

# Load it
source .env
```

### Step 2: Verify Setup
```bash
# Check API key is set
echo $OPENAI_API_KEY

# Should show: sk-...
```

## Common Use Cases

### Evaluate All Pools (2024-Present)
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir results_2024/
```

### Evaluate Without LLM (Faster)
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py --output_dir results_no_llm/
```

### Evaluate Single Pool
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py --pools alphagen --enable_llm --output_dir alphagen_results/
```

### Custom Date Range
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py \
    --test_start 2024-01-01 \
    --test_end 2024-12-31 \
    --enable_llm \
    --output_dir results_2024_only/
```

### Single Factor Analysis (Detailed)
```bash
python run_pool_eval.py \
    --single_factor \
    --enable_llm \
    --output_dir detailed_analysis/
```

## Understanding Output

After running, you'll get:

```
results_2024/
├── summary_20241112_143022.csv          # Quick overview
├── full_results_20241112_143022.json    # Complete data
└── (optional) detailed factor JSONs     # If --single_factor used
```

**Summary CSV contains**:
| pool_name | IC | RankIC | RRE | PFS1 | PFS2 | Diversity | LLM_Score |
|-----------|----|----|-----|------|------|-----------|-----------|
| alphagen_3m | 0.045 | 0.052 | 0.694 | 0.894 | 0.900 | 0.879 | 78.5 |

## Troubleshooting

### "LLM: nan" Still Showing
```bash
# Check if API key is set
echo $OPENAI_API_KEY

# Make sure you used --enable_llm flag
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir results/
```

### "Pool file not found"
```bash
# Check available pools
ls alphagen/*.json
ls gfn_lstm/*/*.json
ls gfn_gnn/*/*.json
```

### Script runs but crashes
```bash
# Check Python version (needs 3.8+)
python --version

# Check required packages
pip install pandas numpy openai qlib
```

## Performance Tips

1. **Without LLM**: 5-10 min per pool
2. **With LLM**: 15-30 min per pool
3. **Run pools in parallel** (different terminals):
   ```bash
   # Terminal 1
   python run_pool_eval.py --pools alphagen --enable_llm --output_dir alphagen/

   # Terminal 2
   python run_pool_eval.py --pools gfn_lstm --enable_llm --output_dir gfn_lstm/

   # Terminal 3
   python run_pool_eval.py --pools gfn_gnn --enable_llm --output_dir gfn_gnn/
   ```

## What Changed vs Old batch_evaluate_pools.py

| Feature | Old | New |
|---------|-----|-----|
| NaN warnings | ❌ Shows many warnings | ✅ Suppressed |
| LLM evaluation | ❌ Shows `nan` | ✅ Works with API key |
| Date range | 2020-2023 | 2024-2025 (configurable) |
| API key config | ❌ Hardcoded | ✅ Env var + CLI |
| Error handling | Basic | Comprehensive |
| Default output | evaluation_results | evaluation_results_2024 |

## Next Steps

After evaluation completes:

1. **Check summary**:
   ```bash
   cat results_2024/summary_*.csv
   ```

2. **Find best pool**:
   ```bash
   # Sort by IC
   cat results_2024/summary_*.csv | sort -t',' -k5 -rn | head -5
   ```

3. **Detailed analysis of best pool**:
   ```bash
   python run_pool_eval.py \
       --pools alphagen \
       --single_factor \
       --enable_llm \
       --output_dir best_pool_detailed/
   ```

## Need Help?

- Full documentation: `POOL_EVAL_README.md`
- Check code: `run_pool_eval.py`
- API key issues: Verify with `echo $OPENAI_API_KEY`

## Example Complete Workflow

```bash
# Complete evaluation workflow
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."

# 1. Quick check
python run_pool_eval.py --compare_only

# 2. Full evaluation
python run_pool_eval.py --enable_llm --output_dir full_eval/

# 3. View results
cat full_eval/summary_*.csv

# 4. Detailed analysis of top pool
python run_pool_eval.py \
    --pools alphagen \
    --single_factor \
    --enable_llm \
    --output_dir alphagen_deep_dive/
```

That's it! 🚀
